---
date:    2023-10-09
time:    13:43:33
tags:
   - untagged
---

<center><p style="color:#777777">231009.1343.33.md</p></center><br>

# Command-line Tips and Tricks

Here are some things I couldn't live without while working on a remote server.

## top, htop

These are tools to check the utilization of your CPU cores.

`top`

- shows all running processes, how long they've been running, and the users that started them.

`htop`

- shows current utilization of all available cores.

Either of these programs can be passed the `-u your_username` command-line argument to show only processes user "your_username" is running, which is especially useful on a shared computing network.

## A Light-weight Text Editor

**`vim`** is my text editor of choice, but several others fill the same niche:

- `nano`
- `emacs`
- `vi`
- `atom`

It is possible to mount a remote server to a local IDE, but I don't have much experience doing this and have always preferred just using `vi` or `vim`.

```{topic} Why use a command-line text editor?
1. They come pre-installed on most servers
    - This is crucial---as the user, you will not have root access to install packages yourself.
2. They can be used without the need for a graphical window (in case {term}`X-forwarding` is not possible)
3. They run very fast via an SSH
```

## `bash`-fu

A colloquialism for mastery of the terminal. There are a lot of neat commands I've only learned about from others sharing their tips and tricks. Here are some of my favorites:

### Ctrl-r

Searches your bash history via autocomplete. Start typing a command after pressing `<Ctrl> <r>` and your most recent command starting with what you've typed so far will be pulled up.

Note that this changes your "location" in your bash history, so if you cancel the autocomplete searcn and use the up and down arrowkeys to flip through your history, you will be at the last searched location instead of your most recently-issued command.

### Piping console output to files

Instead of printing runtime console outputs to the terminal, you can send `stdout` and `stderr` to a text file.

```{code} bash
mpirun -np 16 my_executable > out.log
```

Note that this will overwrite the contents of `out.log`, if that file already exists. To append to a file rather than overwriting it, use two `>` symbols:

```{code} bash
mpirun -np 16 my_executable >> out.log
```

It doesn't matter what extension you give the files on most systems. Pick whatever convention you like best.

You can also split up `stdout` (standard out) and `stderr` (standard error) if you want to separate warnings and error messages from print statements. This can be helpful if there's a lot of information in `stdout` that you don't want to go searching through to find `stderr` content, since in the example above, both are combined.

```{code} bash
mpirun -np 16 my_executable 1>out.log 2>err.log
```

### tail -F

You may know that `tail myfile.txt` will print the last 10 or so lines of a file to the terminal. But did you know that

```{code} bash
tail -F myfile.txt
```

will *continue* to print out the last 10 lines of a file as it's updated?

```{topic} Primary use case for tail -F
You want to run a job and preserve the console output as a log file for record-keeping. But, you also want to check in on the job while it's running to make sure everything goes smoothly.

Start your job and pipe the console output to a file `log.out`:

`mpirun -np 4 my_executable -a my_argument >> log.out`

Use `tail -F` ("tail follow") to follow the last 10 lines of the log as they're updated:

`tail -F log.out`
```

# Glossary

```{glossary}
X-forwarding
    An SSH option that enables server-side graphical user interface (GUI) windows to open on the client-side.

    - Complex graphical applications typically run very slowly, as information must be communicated over the secure connection each time the window is updated
    - Best for opening pre-generated images in a simple image viewer, or quickly looking at a python plot

    **Commands**:

    ```{code} bash
    # Start an X-forwarded SSH session
    ssh -X username@myserver.astro.virginia.edu
    ```

    ```{code} bash
    # Start an X-forwarded SSH session ("trusted", lower security)
    ssh -Y username@myserver.astro.virginia.edu
```


```{bibliography}
:filter: docname in docnames
```
